---
layout: article
title: "Data Testing"
description: "Data testing is a critical process that involves verifying the accuracy, completeness, and consistency of data"
tags: test-frameworks
order: 6
---

#### What is data testing?

Data testing is a critical process that involves verifying the accuracy, completeness, and consistency of data. This includes testing of functional and non-functional aspects of Business Intelligence (BI) solutions, data requests, dataflow processes and data migrations to ensure the reliability and accuracy of data used in various applications.

#### Why we do data testing?

Data testing is a crucial process for organisations, particularly in the context of the public sector. It ensures the quality and reliability of data used for analysis, decision-making, and service delivery.

Additionally, Data Testing is important to ensure [GDS](https://gds.blog.gov.uk/), [GDPR](https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/data-protection/data-protection-regulation/) and [Government](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-government-data-quality-framework) data quality principles are followed -- Fit for purpose, Accessible, Secure, Sustainable and User centred.

## Data Testing Framework

Our Data Testing frameworks focuses on,

#### Functional aspects of data testing

1. **Dashboard/Reports Testing:** Ensures that dashboards display accurate data, business logic validation, up-to-date information and function as expected.
2. **Webpage Testing:** Validates the functionality, usability, integration with the BI reports/dashboards and of webpages.
3. **Permissions Testing:** Verifies that users can access only the data and features relevant to their role and access, ensuring system security.
4. **Data request testing:** Validates that data requests are processed accurately, timely, and with appropriate access controls.
5. **Dataflow testing:** Ensures that dataflows execute correctly, handle errors effectively, and produce accurate, consistent, and timely outputs.
6. **ETL/ELT Data Validation:** Ensures source-to-target reconciliation, correct transformation logic, and end-to-end data integrity.
7. **Data Quality:** Ensures that the data used and generated by the system is accurate, consistent, and relevant.
8. **API Testing:** Checks the functionality, performance, and security of APIs, ensuring they work correctly and efficiently. (Note that the NHSBSA API Testing Framework is followed)

#### Non-functional aspects of data testing

NHSBSA Test Standards and Test Frameworks are followed for Data non-functional testing:

1. **Performance Testing**
2. **Compatibility Testing**
3. **Accessibility Testing**
